DOC-514 Add mongodb_cdc_connector (#186)
redpanda-data/rp-connect-docs: modules/components/pages/inputs/mongodb_cdc.adoc

= mongodb_cdc
// tag::single-source[]
:type: input

> :page-beta: true

Reviewer: Is this going to be beta in both Cloud and Self-Managed?

Author: It's still labelled as experimental so my understanding is yes. @jrkinley, can you confirm?

Reviewer: Since you already define it separately in the Cloud PR, I'd move this out of the single-source tag so we can remove beta individually for Cloud/Self-Managed: modules/develop/pages/connect/components/inputs/mongodb_cdc.adoc

- `collection`: The name of the collection from which the message originated.
- `operation_time`: The time the data change was written to the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/replica-set-oplog/[operations log (oplog)^] in the form of a Binary JSON (BSON) timestamp: `{"t": <unix seconds>, "i": <sequence number>}`.

== Fields

=== `url`

The URL of the target MongoDB server.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `""`

```yml
# Examples

url: mongodb://localhost:27017
```

=== `database`

The name of the MongoDB database to stream changes from.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `""`

=== `username`

The username to connect to the database.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `""`

=== `password`

The password to connect to the database.

include::components:partial$secret_warning.adoc[]

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `""`

=== `collections`

A list of collections to stream changes from. Specify each collection name as a separate item.

*Type*: `array`

*Default*: `[]`

```yml
# Examples

collections:
  - orders
  - customers
  - inventory
```

=== `checkpoint_cache`

> Specify a `cache` resource to store the oplog position for the most recent data update streamed to Redpanda Connect. After a restart, Redpanda Connect can continue processing changes from this position, avoiding the need to reprocess all collection updates.

Reviewer 2: Should we link to the cache documentation here?

*Type*: `int`

*Default*: `1000`

=== `read_batch_size`

The number of documents to fetch in each message batch from MongoDB.

*Type*: `int`

*Default*: `1000`

=== `read_max_wait`

The maximum duration MongoDB waits to accumulate the <<read_batch_size,`read_batch_size`>> documents on a change stream before returning the batch to Redpanda Connect.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `1s`

=== `stream_snapshot`

When set to `true`, this input streams a snapshot of all existing data in the source collections before streaming data changes.

*Type*: `bool`

*Default*: `false`

```yml
# Examples

stream_snapshot: true
```

=== `snapshot_parallelism`

Specifies the number of connections to use when reading the initial snapshot from one or more collections. Increase this number to enable parallel processing of the snapshot. 

This feature uses the `$splitVector` command to split snapshot data into chunks for more efficient processing.

This field is only applicable when `stream_snapshot` is set to `true`. 

*Type*: `int`

*Default*: `1`

=== `snapshot_auto_bucket_sharding`

> Uses the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/aggregation/bucketAuto/[`$bucketAuto`^] command instead of the default, `$splitVector`, to split the snapshot data into chunks for processing. This is required for environments, such as MongoDB Atlas, where privileged access is restricted. To enable parallel processing in these environments:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Uses the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/aggregation/bucketAuto/[`$bucketAuto`^] command instead of the default, `$splitVector`, to split the snapshot data into chunks for processing. This is required for environments, such as MongoDB Atlas, where the `$splitVector` command is not available. To enable parallel processing in these environments:
```

Reviewer 2: I think saying that `$splitVector` is a privileged command might make people think it's a scary command :)

Author: Updated.

- Set this field to to `true`.
- Set `stream_snapshot` to `true`.
- Increase `snapshot_parallelism` to a value greater than `1`.

*Type*: `bool`

*Default*: `false`

=== `document_mode`

The mode in which MongoDB emits document changes to Redpanda Connect, specifically updates and deletes.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `update_lookup`

[cols="1,2"]
|===

> | Option | Description the document mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Option | Description
```

Author: Updated.

    database: "" # No default (required)
    username: "" # Optional
    password: "" # Optional
    collections: [] # No default (required)
    checkpoint_cache: "" # No default (required)
    checkpoint_key: mongodb_cdc_checkpoint
    checkpoint_interval: 5s
    checkpoint_limit: 1000
    read_batch_size: 1000
    read_max_wait: 1s
    stream_snapshot: false
    snapshot_parallelism: 1
    auto_replay_nacks: true
```

--
Advanced::
+
--

```yml
# All configuration fields, showing default values
input:
  label: ""
  mongodb_cdc:
    url: mongodb://localhost:27017 # No default (required)
    database: "" # No default (required)
    username: ""
    password: ""
    collections: [] # No default (required)
    checkpoint_cache: "" # No default (required)
    checkpoint_key: mongodb_cdc_checkpoint
    checkpoint_interval: 5s
    checkpoint_limit: 1000
    read_batch_size: 1000
    read_max_wait: 1s
    stream_snapshot: false
    snapshot_parallelism: 1
    snapshot_auto_bucket_sharding: false
    document_mode: update_lookup
    json_marshal_mode: canonical
    app_name: benthos
    auto_replay_nacks: true
```
--
======

== Prerequisites

> - MongoDB version 6 or later

Author: Please check for accuracy.

ifndef::env-cloud[]
- Network access from the cluster where your Redpanda Connect pipeline is running to the source database environment.
endif::[]
ifdef::env-cloud[]
- Network access from the cluster where your Redpanda Connect pipeline is running to the source database environment. For detailed networking information, including how to set up a VPC peering connection, see xref:networking:index.adoc[Redpanda Cloud Networking].
endif::[]

> - A sharded MongoDB database or MongoDB cluster running as a replica set

Reviewer 2: maybe link to similar items as this post: https://www.mongodb.com/resources/products/capabilities/change-streams see the "Availability of MongoDB Change Streams" section

Author: Updated.

== Data replication

Redpanda Connect allows you to specify which <<collections,database collections>> in your source database to receive changes from.

You can also run the `mongodb_cdc` input in one of two modes, depending on whether you need a snapshot of existing data before streaming updates.

- Snapshot mode: Redpanda Connect first captures a snapshot of all data in the selected collections and streams the contents before processing changes from the last recorded https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/replica-set-oplog/[operations log (oplog)^] position.
- Streaming mode: Redpanda Connect skips the snapshot and processes only the most recent data changes, starting from the latest oplog position.

=== Snapshot mode

If you set the <<stream_snapshot,`stream_snapshot` field>> to `true`, Redpanda Connect connects to your MongoDB database and does the following to capture a snapshot of all data in the selected collections:

> //TODO should include parallel processing of snapshots and document_mode

Author: @rockwotj do you have any notes on this process for taking snapshots as for https://docs.redpanda.com/redpanda-connect/components/inputs/mysql_cdc/

Reviewer 2: Here is the algorithm:

- Record the latest oplog position 
- determine shards using the configured strategy. this is based on bucket auto sharding true/false.

If false (default) we use the internal splitVector command to get shards for each collection then read all collections in parallel using up the max snapshot parallelism workers.

If true we use a autoBucket aggregation to compute the shards and then everything else is the same.

Once we complete reading the snapshot we start the change stream from the earlier recorded oplog position

Author: Updated, hopefully the phrasing is OK.

NOTE: If the pipeline restarts during this process, Redpanda Connect must start the snapshot capture from scratch to store the current oplog position in the <<checkpoint_cache,`checkpoint_cache`>>.

> //TODO

Author: Just a placeholder in case the process for taking a snapshot is split into two stages.

Author: Updated.

Finally, the input uses the stored oplog position to catch up with changes that occurred during snapshot processing.

=== Streaming mode

If you set the <<stream_snapshot,`stream_snapshot` field>> to `false`, Redpanda Connect connects to your MongoDB database and starts processing data changes from the latest oplog position. If the pipeline restarts, Redpanda Connect resumes processing updates from the last oplog position written to the <<checkpoint_cache,`checkpoint_cache`>>.

> == Data mappings

Author: I don't think this section is required for this connector, but please confirm.

Reviewer 2: No it's not

Author: Removed.

The following table shows how selected MongoDB data types are mapped to data types supported in Redpanda Connect. All other data types are mapped to string values.

|===
| MongoDB data type | Bloblang value

| Placeholder
| Placeholder

|===

== Metadata

This input adds the following metadata fields to each message:

- `operation`: The type of data change that generated the message: `read`, `create`, `update`, `replace`, `delete`, `update`. A `read` operation occurs when the initial snapshot of the database is processed.
- `collection`: The name of the collection from which the message originated.

> - `operation_time`: The time the data change was written to the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/replica-set-oplog/[operations log (oplog)^].

Reviewer 2: This is a bson timestamp meaning it's in the form of `{"t": <unix seconds>, "i": <sequence number>}`

Author: Updated.

=== `collections`

A list of collections to stream changes from. Specify each collection name as a separate item.

*Type*: `array`

*Default*: `[]`

```yml
# Examples

collections:
  - orders
  - customers
  - inventory
```

=== `checkpoint_cache`

Specify a `cache` resource to store the oplog position for the most recent data update streamed to Redpanda Connect. After a restart, Redpanda Connect can continue processing changes from this position, avoiding the need to reprocess all collection updates.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `""`

```yml
# Examples

input:
  mongodb_cdc:
    url: mongodb://localhost:27017
    collections: [my_collection]
    checkpoint_cache: "my_cdc_cache"
cache_resources:
  - label: "my_cdc_cache"
    redis:
      url: redis://:6379
```

=== `checkpoint_key`

The key identifier used to store the oplog position in <<checkpoint_cache,`checkpoint_cache`>>. If you have multiple `mongodb_cdc` inputs sharing the same cache, you can provide an alternative key.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `mongodb_cdc_checkpoint`

=== `checkpoint_interval`

The interval between writing checkpoints to the cache.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `5s`

=== `checkpoint_limit`

> The maximum number of messages that this input can process at a given time. Increasing this limit enables parallel processing, and batching at the output level. To preserve at-least-once guarantees, any given oplog position is not acknowledged until all messages under that offset are delivered.

Author: Please check for accuracy.

Reviewer 2: I would not say "input would process at a given time" but something like: "number of inflight messages from this input at a given time"

Author: Updated. I needed a verb so I used 'emitted'. Hope that is OK.

*Type*: `int`

*Default*: `1000`

=== `read_batch_size`

> The number of documents to fetch in each message batch from MongoDB.

Author: Is this just for the initial snapshot read.

Reviewer 2: No, for the streaming phase mongo waits up to max time or batch size before sending us new data

Author: Will leave as it then.

The maximum duration MongoDB waits to accumulate the <<read-batch-size, `read_batch_size`>> documents on a change stream before returning the batch to Redpanda Connect.

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `1s`

=== `stream_snapshot`

When set to `true`, this input streams a snapshot of all existing data in the source collections before streaming data changes.

*Type*: `bool`

*Default*: `false`

```yml
# Examples

stream_snapshot: true
```

=== `snapshot_parallelism`

Specifies the number of connections to use when reading the initial snapshot from one or more collections. Increase this number to enable parallel processing of the snapshot.

This feature uses the `$splitVector` command to split snapshot data into chunks for more efficient processing.

*Type*: `int`

*Default*: `1`

=== `snapshot_auto_bucket_sharding`

Uses the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/operator/aggregation/bucketAuto/[`$bucketAuto`^] command instead of the default, `$splitVector`, to split the snapshot data into chunks for processing. This is required for environments, such as MongoDB Atlas, where privileged access is restricted. To enable parallel processing in these environments:

> - Set `snapshot_auto_bucket_sharding` to `true`.

Reviewer 2: this should be stream_snapshot?

Author: I have update wording to the following so that it's clear that this field needs to be set to true as well:

- Set this field to to `true`.
- Set `stream_snapshot` to `true`.
- Increase `snapshot_parallelism` to a value greater than `1`.

    # root.name."address.city" = "New York"
    {"path": ["name", "address.city"], "type": "set", "value": "New York"},

    # type == unset: Indicates that a value was deleted. For example:
    # root.phone = deleted()
    {"path": ["phone"], "type": "unset", "value": null},

    # type == truncatedArray: Indicates that an array was truncated to a specified number of elements. For example:
    # root.items = this.items.slice(2)
    {"path": ["items"], "type": "truncatedArray", "value": 2}
  ]
}
----

| `pre_and_post_images`
a| Emits full documents for update and delete operations by using pre- and post-image collections.  
For setup and configuration details, see the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#change-streams-with-document-pre--and-post-images[MongoDB documentation^].

| `update_lookup`
a| Emits full documents for insert, replace, and update operations, but only the `_id` field for delete operations.  
This corresponds to the `updateLookup` option.  
For more information, see the https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/changeStreams/#std-label-change-streams-updateLookup[MongoDB documentation^].

|===

=== `json_marshal_mode`

> Controls how MongoDB formats messages sent to Redpanda Connect.

Author: Is this correct?

*Type*: `string`

*Default*: `canonical`

|===
| Option | Description

| `canonical`

> | A string format that preserves type information at the expense of readability and interoperability. Conversion from canonical to Binary JSON (BSON) generally retains type information, except in specific cases.

Author: I'm not sure when this conversion from canonical to BSON occurs. When a message is emitted from MongoDB? And then there is a conversion from BSON to JSON when it reaches RPCN?

Author: Updated.

> | A string format that preserves the exact data types of values stored in MongoDB at the expense of readability and interoperability. Conversion from canonical to Binary JSON (BSON) generally retains type information, except in specific cases.

Author: Reading this again, I'm not sure about when the conversion from canonical to BSON is happening. Is this the process?

- MongoDB converts message from canonical to BSON
- RPCN receives the message and converts from BSON to JSON

Reviewer 2: Mongo sends us bson. We convert that to json in the format based on this option

Reviewer 2: Or maybe their docs are better: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/mongodb-extended-json/
